Today is April 30, 1984, and I am interviewing Norman Borlaug again.
And last time, we got up to about the time of your graduate work at Minnesota.
And I was wondering, you got a master's degree in plant pathology in 1940 and a doctorate just one year later.
How did you do that?
Well, first of all, it may well be listed in plant pathology, but my first graduate degree, the master's, was really in forest pathology.
My thesis was in forest pathology problem, and it happened, I don't remember whether we touched on this in how I came back to graduate school or not, but just in the case we did not.
The last
Where do you have it down as plant pathology?
All right.
But the last quarter when I was there, about two weeks before graduation, I saw on the bulletin board that Dr. E.C.
Stakeman was giving a Sigma Psi lecture on the shifty little enemies that destroy our crops.
So I want to hear this.
And Dr. Stakeman is one of the most forceful lecturers that I ever heard.
He has this rare capacity to really bring you close to him or he close to you.
And he always spices his lectures, even though they may be very technical, with a lot of general interest, how it touches the masses of people.
And I was very impressed.
And I said that someday if I ever study at graduate level, I would like to study under him.
And so it turned out that I was supposed to have gone back to Idaho permanent job in the Forest Service in February.
I had passed my civil service exam with a pretty good reading.
And I got a letter from the
supervisor of the Idaho National said, look, we've got a little budgetary problem.
If it's all right with you, could you wait until the first of May or the middle of May, which is really when we need you anyway?
So I wrote back and said yes.
That being the case, I registered in plant pathology to start a master's degree.
But I was still interested in forest pathology.
I wouldn't budge the whole way.
And so I started working with Clyde M. Christensen as my counselor on the forest pathology problem.
Sure, I took the general courses that you would in general plant pathology.
And then I got my master's in that field and shifted over to general.
The reason that there's such a short difference in the time I got this, after I had taken part of this coursework,
This hurricane came through New England, and there was a timber salvage operation by the Forest Service, and so they called me and asked if I would, knowing that I had worked there before, would be interested and do this.
And so I figured, well, maybe I can get a little more money together here to come back and spend a little easier life in graduate school.
So I went out there and dropped out of school and then came back.
And the result was that I took that
and then my course worked for my masters.
I took my delayed exam, in other words, for my masters.
And at the same time that I was fairly well along on my doctorate, the exact dates I don't remember.
And then I had all my thesis work done, all my coursework done, and the last year when I was at Minnesota, starting in
Well, I taught in the general college, and then accepted this job to go to DuPont.
But I hadn't written my thesis yet.
I had all the data.
My thesis was on flax wilt.
the fungus that causes damping off of the plantlets and sometimes killing of the more mature plants in flax.
Fusarium lini is the fungus.
And I was studying the pathogenic or the variation in the pathogenicity of the fungus in the different soils
where flax was grown and trying to do something about making crosses and combinations which would give descendants a progeny which would be resistant to this.
What did you find?
Well, we found quite a few interesting things.
This was the first time that anyone had worked in depth on the variation in this and we found
some types that were very pathogenic, but that if you use the right parent, no problem in crossing them and recovering from this progeny that combined resistance to many.
And these had been sent to several different stations, including North Dakota and a couple places in Minnesota, and I think one up in Canada.
The details escaped me now.
we found that it was fairly stable resistance.
And as a matter of fact, flax wilt, not just because of that, but sort of was no longer a major disease.
You see, flax, when you re-grew it on the same soil, start out in virgin soil, as far as flax was concerned, you'd have high yields and then it'd peter out because of the killing of many of the plants.
That early work, I think, was done originally out in North Dakota by Dr. Bali, who was a friend of Dr. Stateman's.
And is that why you did this?
Because Stateman had an interest in it then?
I think so.
Or did you develop your own interest in this?
No, I was a scientist at the doctorate level.
Nobody had really done a very adequate job of finding out about the
variation in pathogenicity at that time.
I think it might be interesting to say that since we are talking about Dr. Stakeman, I just got my copy of Dr. E.C.
Stakeman, Scientist and Statesman for Agriculture, I believe is his title, was just published.
My copy just came last Thursday.
Unfortunately, I left it at home today.
And it was written by C.M.
Clyde M. Christensen, who was the professor originally of forest pathology when I studied there, under whom I started my master's.
But later in his professional career, he became interested in mycotoxins and was one of the early people who worked on aflatoxin, the highly toxic carcinogenic property that...
produced by Aspergillus Flavus, and he writes very well.
I'm going to order up some copies.
When did he publish it?
It just came off the press last week.
Really?
And it's the life of Stakeman.
He probably knew him.
So, Christensen's still alive, huh?
There were two Christensens in the department, but C.M.
Christensen Clyde, who did the work I just described to you, was
He retired as, what do they call, the outstanding professors?
Emeritus?
No, but before he became emeritus.
Distinguished professor?
Distinguished professor, and he taught not only in the College of Agriculture, but in the medical school on fungal diseases of human beings.
a very good writer, so he's just published this book, which is a good insight into the, it was published by the American Phytopathological Society in St.
Paul, and it gives a good insight into Dr.
E.C.'
's statement.
As a matter of fact, I wrote the foreword for it, and he was a guy that, I think I may have told you, he tried to make you reach for a star, whether you reached it or not, that was another matter.
But he also had the unique ability to be able to try to sort of sense what the niche was that most of his graduate students might feel very satisfactorily taking into consideration their academic and scientific excellence and also their temperament and personality and interest and find slots where they would
do a good job and still be happy.
That was one of Stakeman's outstanding characteristics as a teacher.
I've said many times that he was probably one of the great teachers and educators of this century and maybe of all centuries.
Now I'd like to ask you what impact he had on your life.
Stakeman?
Yeah.
Tremendous.
Both at the time when I was there
At the time probably I didn't appreciate it very much because I have just said that when I made the shift it was to forest pathology but he was too wise to leave me there because and he told me eventually when he was trying to convert me to general plant pathology that your opportunities for employment in forest pathology
at the present time are very limited.
There's so few positions that will give you sufficient support, budgetary support, so that you can do a decent job.
The better you study general plant pathology, and with that, if a position opens in forestry, forest pathology, you can go that way, but you can't come from forest pathology to general seropatology without
lots of difficulties and many doors won't open for you.
As a matter of fact at the same time there was another forester from Yale who later became a very good plant pathologist who was going through the same doors at about the same time.
He later became the, see if I can come up with his name right now, at Washington State their head seropathologist many years later.
Walt Hendricks and so we kind of got the same treatment but this was why and I think he was the statement was very wise in insisting on this.
Would you consider him sort of your intellectual father then?
Yes, statement by all means was right down to his waning days.
As a matter of fact he died at the age of 94.
and up until about a year before he died mentally he was just as sharp as a tank and the last year before he had the stroke I invited him down to Mexico to our west coast so that he could
give a few seminars to these young people that came from all different countries, and in part to get them out of the snow and the blizzards in Minnesota at that time.
He accepted and he came.
We thought that it might be nice for him to give one a week for one hour, but it wasn't made that way.
He decided he had to give at least two, and generally there were two or three hours.
At that season of the year, especially during harvest,
approaching harvest.
There would be many senior scientists visiting our station from U.S., from Canada, from Australia, from many countries.
And I used to once in a while wander into the seminar room and here I would see many of these senior scientists.
They were sitting on their little pollinating stool that they were carrying out to the field plots and they wanted to hear him talk to these young people.
He still had lots of spark and charisma and ability to sell science to young people but also to more senior people right down to the end.
The last day when he was there, the last work day as it were, I asked him if he would be willing to give a public lecture.
our auditorium is small it probably won't hold more than 150 something like that at our research center and since there are a lot of visiting all the trainees about probably 40 or so of them from different countries and some of our senior staff and the staff of the National Institute were there couldn't open it up to the general public but I said I'd like to invite some of the people the farmer groups who have been
responsible for economic support to our programs, if you would be willing to do this.
We said, oh, I'd like to do this.
So it was arranged, and people that I'd been affiliated with in the local community, starting with the Cayes family, they were there.
The widow of Don Rodolfo Cayes and his daughter and son were there, sitting in the front row.
So I had a nice little table and the microphone on the table down on the platform, and so I introduced Dickman, and I said I'd arranged that he was going to sit down and be relaxed.
But that wasn't the way he was made.
I'd no sooner introduced him, and he stood up, and he stood there for an hour and 15 minutes, and he told about the history of agriculture, not only agriculture, well, both agriculture and science, from the beginning up until then.
And he does a magnificent job.
And then... And he was 92 at the time?
He was 92.
And then he said, now, if there are any questions, I'll be glad to try to answer them.
And then this started.
Finally, after about a half an hour of that, I decided to kill the poor guy.
So we called it off.
And that night, the Thais family invited us over for barbecue over in their backyard.
It was warm then.
more or less this time of the year, a little later.
No, about this time of the year.
And so we were going to accompany him back to St.
Paul because we weren't so sure that he was in that good health.
He had problems with moving.
He had probably already had a slight stroke, judging from the way his leg movements were.
But the night before he said,
Well, I have to go to Mexico City.
I have to go down and see how the graduate school is doing, which he was instrumental in starting, the first graduate school in agricultural science in Latin America.
He had been the both academic and spiritual founder.
And I tried to talk him out of it and I called our office and I said,
Look, I think that to take them up to that elevation might not be good.
And I talked to our assistant director who was from Minnesota, Robert Osler, and he said, well, I'll call you tomorrow morning.
We'll talk it over here.
Well, to make a long story short, they called and they said, well, we've talked it over.
And they said, I'd like to see what you think.
If something should go wrong, this is probably the way he'd like to happen, with his boots on.
And so he insisted he was going and I called him.
They went out and got him at the airport and they arranged so that somebody would come up and they'd drive the car out onto the ramp and that wasn't any good.
He wanted to go through the regular things which he did.
He went out to the graduate school and he gave a lecture.
Then he went to our center and he gave us a seminar and he was wonderfully happy and he
went back to Minneapolis, and about six weeks later, in a very hot spell, apparently got dehydrated and had an attack when he was at home.
And he lived, but never the same easy statement, I think about a year, a little more than a year.
So he probably died of some sort of stroke then?
Well, he was a fabulous character.
And it was he.
He was one of the three who made the feasibility study of the Rockefeller program.
I think we mentioned this early, I believe, in one of the early tapes, when the request for assistance had come to Vice President Henry Wallace.
No, we haven't got to that yet.
Oh, excuse me.
So then I'll cut it off here.
Yeah, because we'll get to that.
Okay.
Because I want to find out how Rockefeller got involved.
And I found out some things these last two weeks since I saw you.
about how all the threads are underneath with Dr. Seaman Knapp, the first demonstration, agricultural demonstrator in the U.S., indirectly the father of the extension services of all USA, was entangled.
Oh, good.
He was inducted into the Hall of Fame.
Oh, and so when you were running?
Yeah, right, sure.
Well, we'll get to that, but I want to get back to the University of Minnesota now, and in 1941, you were finished, and then why did you become an instructor there?
Why didn't you go to work back for the government, to work for a company, or...?
Well, I was doing this while I was trying to write my thesis.
Oh, okay.
But the point was that I didn't get any time to write because I was digging right in front of those students.
Sure.
And this was across the... It was a broad-scoped
Horizon course, it was natural resources and basic wealth, land and water, plants, forests, Exactly, for liberal arts students and mineral resource.
So that's what kept me there.
And you did that for one year?
No, just for a quarter.
It was, the assignment was for a year, but then when I got to sign this job with DuPont,
then I left to accept that.
Okay, well the war erupted in 1941.
Why didn't you go into the military?
Because I'd accepted this job and I was out in DuPont when the order came and by that time the War Manpower Commission was getting involved in all of this.
As a matter of fact I got to I think at least two
maybe three, I think three induction notice report to Camp Dix at such and such a date and always something happened that said just a minute because all sorts of problems started appearing on the horizon and at that time there were only two sort of microbiological laboratories in the whole USA, the Pant and Dow, putting to one side the pharmaceutical but those working on
microorganisms in various other incendiary kinds of capacities.
And so this laboratory was converted over to one of these dollar a year contracts for doing whatever kinds of services that the military wanted.
They ran the whole gamut of things, testing different kinds of materials for different kinds of uses.
all sorts of things with camouflage paints.
Yeah, well, we're going to get to that.
I want to find out about all those different types of experiments.
I wanted to find out, though, first about what were your feelings as soon as the war erupted?
I mean, did you want to go into the military in some capacity, or would you have rather gone to work in more of a defense like DuPont doing research?
Well, I didn't have any feeling for this.
I guess it hit everyone pretty much by surprise, at least it did me.
And so I had never thought much about what the alternatives were.
I thought I would soon have been inducted.
And it so happened that in our laboratory we had lots of technicians that were well
experienced, had worked for quite a few years, not university people, but good technicians that had handled many of these problems, and suddenly all of those were pulled out and everything got all tangled up.
There were very little supervisory capacity.
They brought back technicians, all young girls, just out of high school, and it was kind of a mess everywhere, and then
these problems started.
So the original technicians then were drafted?
They were all drafted, unless there was somebody with a 4F health problem.
Okay, well let's talk then about how you got involved with DuPont.
The way I probably got this job was the person, Dr. Frank Cawford, who had also taken his major
in plant pathology, but he was a forest pathologist under Dr. Stakeman, had originally, after he'd got his degree, and I knew him as an instructor.
As a matter of fact, I guess I took a course or so from him in forestry, had gone to DuPont.
This was several years before, maybe three or maybe four, maybe even five.
And he had started working on wood chemicals.
chemicals for use in wood in various capacities.
And then he had been offered a, I don't remember if it was professorship, associate professorship, I suppose, back in Minnesota.
And so he came back maybe a year or more before I had finished.
And
temporarily or then they hired someone else but for some reason he didn't stay he stayed only about a year left and I suspect pretty strongly that when when letters were sent to different institutions one must have come to the University of Minnesota to stake them probably or maybe to Crawford or maybe both and I was recommended by
for this job and this was, as I say, probably in the summer of... 42.
No, 41.
41.
Then it was before the war erupted now.
Yes.
Oh, so you were working... Before, I had the contract before.
Oh, you had the contract, but you didn't go to work until 1942.
Just the end of December 41.
I was in, I was in route
Pearl Harbor.
You were en route to Dupont when you heard about Pearl Harbor?
Then I didn't know whether to go or to come back.
So, yes.
I got out there and the world seems to crumble every day.
Another big disaster.
one of the Normandy was blowing up and this that the big passenger troop carrying thing in one of the eastern harbors I've forgotten whether it was New York or New Jersey or someplace one thing after another and of course everything was coming apart in the South Pacific and all the troublesome
the South Pacific, sooner.
A lot of them were coming into the labs.
Now, what was your title?
What was your job?
What were your responsibilities?
I was classified as a microbiologist, and originally it would have been to have worked on agricultural chemicals, including wood chemicals, but that never got unfolded because before that happened,
military pretty largely decided what was to be done and as so many contracts were in order to and this must have been by mutual agreement of the companies and the armed forces and the government how those were worked out with my young age at that time I had no way of knowing but war manpower
must have realized that they had to keep a certain core of people in research to deal with problems that were likely to be forthcoming related to the military effort.
And I suppose pretty early was evident about vector-borne diseases, malaria and these sorts of things as it relates back to insecticides.
Not only that, but other things.
Disinfectant, rapid action ones for water, for canteens, for the
dumping it out of the river and some kind of thing to kill off the worst of these beasts in the water so that you could drink it in a short period of time.
So basically then DuPont was in some sort of a cooperative arrangement?
A dollar a year is what they
Was this with the Office of Scientific Research and Development then?
I suspect that's right.
I don't remember the details about which government agencies the contracts were with, but it was by that kind of an emergency organization.
But which one?
I don't recall.
And they would work for a dollar a year for the federal government?
That's what they charge for my services.
In other words, DuPont took care of
My salary and the people that were in my laboratories, including, we soon had to build up a core of scientists that were outside of military aid, women or 4F people or elderly people.
When a lot of these contract jobs came, I say contract, they were paper contacts, we never charged them, but they were contracts to dual service, the armed forces.
And how many researchers did you have?
In the biological side we only had, let's see, one, two, three, three.
One, a very good bacteriologist who had worked, she was one of the early people who had worked with Wachsman, Selma Wachsman on
Antibiotics.
Chloromycin was her doctor's thesis, I believe.
And she also had strong background in bacteriology, which related back to some of this thing like with
compounds for use in disinfecting of water, rapid action ones.
And did the government ask you folks to come up with ideas yourself, or did they have ideas?
Generally they brought the problem and said, do something about it.
And what were some of the problems that you tried to solve?
Far-ranging across a whole series of spectrum of things.
First of all, a lot of them had to do with deterioration of material and equipment under tropical conditions, especially in the South Pacific, and so we rigged up what we called the Jungle Room.
kind of like dripping tropics with high temperatures, full of all kinds of microorganisms that would spray around there.
This was testing all kinds of materials that were being used, including fabrics, camouflage paints, all sorts of things.
You mean fabrics that wouldn't rot?
And then we had another room where they were real soil tests that went into things like sandbags in the tropics where they wouldn't rot.
But also, camouflage from the standpoint of the way the molds would change so that the camouflage was not there.
The cameras would soon pick it up because they'd become stained or the reflection was different than the original that was put on in the paint.
You follow what I mean?
No.
Modified by the action.
No, I don't understand this, really.
Modified by the action of the bacteria or molds, not bacteria, the fungi growing on the camouflage paint that had been put onto the, let's say, the tents.
So this really wasn't a paint down?
What was it?
Some kind of a base that would... No, they were paints.
You see, you'd cook up the camouflage paints and the fabric would go through these vats
you would get patchy, well just like the ordinary camouflage in GI's equipment now, but this was mostly in installation and taints and all of these sorts of things.
And let's see, what were some of the others?
How well did that work?
How well did these camouflage paints work?
Well, they'd soon get in trouble because the planes up there would pick up these things, especially when the molds would grow on them because the
In the early ones, we didn't have any mold stabilizers.
Fungi grow on the oils that were in those paints beautifully.
Same way when the Marines were isolated in Guadalcanal and some of the other South Pacific islands, the Japanese by day controlled both the air and the water.
and the problem was how to supply them.
It so happened that before World War II, all of the bonding agents, the seals that are used in the bottom of cardboard cartons into which you put tin food cans, was made from sodium silicate.
Sodium silicate is pretty soluble in water.
so that once it had been in contact with water why it would open up even though the cardboard of the carton would still have kept it afloat for quite a few hours except for that and I remember the day vividly when somebody came in and said look at this we've got to have something that will hold a bond
I don't remember the hours, but sodium silicate used to come unglued.
The whole cans would fall out of the carton in a few hours.
In other words, the bond was weaker than the cardboard itself.
And they said, we have to have something that's stable in water, and we need it day after yesterday.
And those are the way things worked.
The trouble was that at that time there were orders of priorities for all the raw materials in everything.
You had to have a high enough priority to know which things were worth sampling.
Because it was no good to show that something was satisfactory if you didn't have a priority as far as the job you were on to get the raw materials.
it went to some other division or some other product, and that's the way it was time and again.
So generally you'd have to pick out several, because these priorities would shift also, so that you had a one, two, three, and a fourth choice, depending on how it shook out in the end that the priorities were at the given point when you're ready to use it.
that time some of these polyvinyl alcohols which became plastics.
You see, this was very soon after synthetic fibers came into being.
Nylon was just coming into use as women's stockings when Pearl Harbor came.
They were really not really full commercial.
They were out on, how do you call this, sales development.
Sure, they were selling them but trying to give
records of how long they were served.
They lasted all of this and whether they had a future market.
I remember vividly- Market surveys.
Exactly.
Well, soon there wasn't any nylon for women's stockings.
It was going into one thing, especially into parachutes, because it
could stand the abuse and it was better than any other, relatively light for the strength it had.
And so it was all going in that direction.
And then I remember, I've forgotten what use this was for.
We had to have another lightweight fabric that would do certain things and wouldn't rot.
I've forgotten what the use was.
But anyway, the only synthetic
fiber that is the new ones was nylon, and that was for the parachutes especially.
But cellulose, cellophane, or the fiber that went into what the devil we used to call these?
Synthetic, that is, they were made from wood fiber, viscose process.
the molds would grow on those and they'd destroy it just as fast as they would paper.
But then when it was acidified, when it was cellulose acetate, the molds couldn't touch it.
Well, you soon found out many of these things.
But the cellulose acetate, which is made simply by reacting the viscose before it was spun out in fibers with
Acetic acid made the bond that the molds couldn't attack, but it was very susceptible to many solvents.
Acetone just dissolved in a bunch of goo in your hands.
So there were all kinds of these things that we were feeling around on and for certain uses, some of which I've even forgotten what they were.
One day a tremendous amount of equipment, electrical equipment,
came in in a big box with a colonel and a general from the quartermaster.
This is what's happening out in the field in the South Pacific on our communications.
They were all shorting out from molds again, attacking the insulating coatings that were being used.
So, you'd have to
work with the manufacturer of this and incorporate certain things in or find out what was available and then they would make them up for testing and we would put them into our jungle room and get a reading on them as soon as possible and all sorts of things like this.
But rubber was very short supply.
This was in the
very beginning of plastic.
This must have been kind of exciting now.
Oh I enjoyed it and I learned a great deal about many things and I think that I told you that the first and of course we were working on this malaria problem early started showing up and we had one section in the laboratory working pretty much on
on insecticides.
And one of the test organisms we used was a housefly.
They had become very highly specialized in this.
DuPont sold what was called a synergist.
I've even forgotten.
The IN was never sold under a trade name.
The IN, because it never went to the consumer.
It went to those who fabricated the insecticides.
At that time, most of the insecticides used for controlling household insects, especially flies and mosquitoes, was a pyrethrum-based natural insecticide from the petals of the pyrethrum plant, which became in short supply very soon also because it was produced mostly in Africa.
And then to this,
We would add this IM, whatever it was, 370 or something.
I've forgotten the code number.
And it would increase the efficiency of this very greatly, especially the knockdown or the paralytic effect.
When you added this to the pyrethrum base, why the knockdown on the flies was fantastically different.
So sort of an early type of off or one of those, one of the, was it a parasol?
It wasn't a repellent.
Oh, it wasn't a repellent?
But the first aerosols were done in this laboratory when we got going on the, a little later, on DDT.
Oh, well, how did this work?
How did this stuff from Africa work?
The one to go with the pyrethrum base?
Yeah.
Well, until we ran out of that.
What was the name of it?
It never had a great name.
It was an IN.
The way I remember was 370.
That doesn't sound quite right.
But anyway, IN was the DuPont code number of experimental compounds.
And it never reached the consumer per se.
It was sold to an insecticide company that manufactured fly or mosquito control agents.
Many of DuPont's chemicals then, and I think even today, are not sold direct to consumers.
They're ingredients that goes into manufacturers.
And these are supposed to keep these bugs off of our men in Southeast Asia, our South Pacific young.
Then one day, and of course during this period there was a new crisis every few days.
War.
Exactly.
And suddenly, oh I guess this was
I don't remember, I suppose it was 73 or late 72.
There was a great to-do in the meeting, and here was this compound that had come from ICI under some code name.
They didn't know what it was either at that time.
Oh, it was ICI.
Imperial Chemicals Limited.
industry limited of Britain and it so happened that a few months before on the Eastern Front in Russia between Russia and I suppose Poland there was a hell of an outbreak of typhus among the Soviets but the Germans weren't infested
And then they took a few prisoners and they found a little pill box with some powder in it in their uniform.
A few days later the Russians pushed up and overran a little mixing plant where they were mixing this stuff.
And they took back quite a few pounds of it to Moscow and divided and kept half and sent half to ICI.
They divided and sent part to us.
And this turned out to be DDT.
Of course, in a short time, our chemists, maybe elsewhere they traced it too, but we were the first to produce it.
Both the chemists or specialists really in synthesizing things, they've got some uncanny extra senses, including things like smell and
taste and all of these things to complement the data of the reactions and how they go and then of course through the patents they're always tracing this too and they think they got a lead on something and in a very short period of time they knew that this was a compound that was patented by Geige several years before in Switzerland and it was tested not on mosquitoes
but of all things, the clothes moth that destroys woolen clothing.
So the Germans then had been manufacturing this, the DDT, that they originally got from a Swiss patent?
I expect so.
They never knew the mechanics or all the details there.
And the Americans weren't... Weren't using it, weren't testing it even.
But knew that it existed because of the patent, the Swiss patent?
Yes, and so...
In a short period of time, then they started testing it in our lab, and then one USDA lab down in Florida, where they had, we tested it on quite a few insects.
In Florida, they'd already been testing certain other chemicals for mosquito, larval control, especially, mostly in the larval states.
And we worked closely with them.
And in a short period of time, it became apparent that this was very effective on the whole range of insects, including vector-borne diseases other than